feat: local Keycloak + Envoy Gateway dev-local setup (#1166)
netgroup-polito/CrownLabs: dev-local/envoy/README.md

# Envoy Gateway — single ingress point for dev-local

> A single [Envoy Gateway](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/) (Kubernetes Gateway API)

Reviewer: Please re-write so that you have a new line only when there's a "dot" that concludes a sentence.

fronting every locally-exposed dev-local service under one local domain

> (`*.crownlabs.local`), replacing the old per-service `NodePort` pattern (used by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`*.crownlabs.local`), avoiding the old `NodePort` pattern that has to be configured per each service.
```

> Keycloak until now). Do this **before** [`../keycloak/README.md`](../keycloak/README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do this **before** [`../keycloak/README.md`](../keycloak/README.md)
```

> — Keycloak's manifest now includes an `HTTPRoute` that depends on the `Gateway`

Reviewer: I cannot understand this sentence.

created here.

TLS terminates here, at the Gateway edge, with one self-signed wildcard
certificate. Every backend behind it (Keycloak, [Mailpit](../mailpit/README.md))
is reached over plain HTTP internally — nothing else needs its own
certificate or HTTPS listener.

## 0. Prerequisites

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the Envoy Gateway API, you need the following components:

```

- The base k3s cluster — see [`../base-k3s/README.md`](../base-k3s/README.md).
- cert-manager, for the wildcard certificate below:
  ```bash
  kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/download/v1.20.3/cert-manager.yaml
  kubectl wait --for=condition=Available deployment --all -n cert-manager --timeout=120s
  ```

## 1. Disable k3s's bundled Traefik

k3s ships Traefik as its default ingress controller, with its own `LoadBalancer`
`Service` bound to the node's 80/443 via k3s's `ServiceLB` (`svclb-traefik`). Envoy

> Gateway's own `Service` needs those same ports, so Traefik has to go first — this repo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway's own `Service` needs the same ports, so Traefik has to be removed.
This project 
```

uses Envoy Gateway instead of Traefik's own (more limited) Gateway API support.

> Add a dedicated drop-in file under `/etc/rancher/k3s/config.yaml.d/` (requires

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable Traefik, add a dedicated drop-in file under `/etc/rancher/k3s/config.yaml.d/` (requires
```

Pin an explicit release (not `latest`) — the `latest` *tag* for the install manifest and
the `latest` *image* tag can drift out of sync with each other (tested: this produced a
controller crash — `no matches for kind "ListenerSet" in version
"gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1"` — because the CRD bundle was older than what the
controller image expected):

```bash
kubectl apply --server-side --force-conflicts -f https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/releases/download/v1.8.2/install.yaml
kubectl wait --timeout=120s -n envoy-gateway-system deployment/envoy-gateway --for=condition=Available
```

`--force-conflicts` is required here: k3s's bundled `traefik-crd` chart already installs
the core Gateway API CRDs (`GatewayClass`/`Gateway`/`HTTPRoute`/...) at an older schema
version, field-managed by `helm`; this takes over that field ownership so Envoy Gateway
can upgrade them. Safe to do even before Traefik itself is disabled — Helm never deletes
CRDs on chart uninstall, so this doesn't put those CRDs at risk once `traefik-crd`'s
release (if ever) goes away.

> If you hit `The CustomResourceDefinition "backendtlspolicies.gateway.networking.k8s.io"

> > is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: ... must remain in spec.versions` — confirm no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: ... must remain in spec.versions`, please do the following:
```

> > `BackendTLSPolicy` objects exist yet (`kubectl get backendtlspolicies -A`, expected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1) Confirm no `BackendTLSPolicy` objects exist yet (`kubectl get backendtlspolicies -A`, expected:
```

> > none on a fresh install) and delete just that CRD before re-running the command above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> none on a fresh install);
> 2) Delete just that CRD before re-running the command above:
```

> `kubectl delete crd backendtlspolicies.gateway.networking.k8s.io`.

## 3. Apply the shared Gateway

```bash
kubectl apply -f dev-local/envoy/manifests
kubectl wait --for=condition=Ready certificate/crownlabs-tls -n default --timeout=30s
```

This applies:
- `ClusterIssuer selfsigned` + `Certificate crownlabs-tls` — the wildcard cert
  (`*.crownlabs.local`), cert-manager-issued, in the `crownlabs-tls` Secret.
- `GatewayClass envoy-gateway` and `Gateway crownlabs` (namespace `default`) — one HTTPS
  listener (443, terminates TLS with the cert above) and one HTTP listener (80, redirect
  only).
- `HTTPRoute http-to-https-redirect` — any plain-HTTP request to `*.crownlabs.local`
  gets a 301 to HTTPS.

Envoy Gateway auto-creates the actual `LoadBalancer` `Service` backing this `Gateway`,

> under `envoy-gateway-system`, with an auto-generated name. Find it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
under `envoy-gateway-system`, with an auto-generated name.
To find it:
```

```bash
kubectl get svc -n envoy-gateway-system
# look for the LoadBalancer-type Service, e.g. envoy-default-crownlabs-<hash>
```

Once Traefik is disabled (step 1) and its DaemonSet has released 80/443, k3s's

> `ServiceLB` assigns those same ports to this Service — confirm:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ServiceLB` assigns those same ports to this Service.
You can verify with the following command:
```

> edits the *Linux/WSL2-side* `/etc/hosts` — it's what lets processes running
> inside WSL2 itself (the apiserver, `curl`, the operator) resolve the hostname.
> The browser runs on **Windows**, which resolves hostnames using its own,
> separate hosts file — tested and confirmed: without this, the browser fails
> with `DNS_PROBE_FINISHED_NXDOMAIN`, not a certificate warning, since it never
> even gets far enough to open a connection. Add the same line there too, from
> an **elevated** PowerShell (plain Notepad-as-administrator can silently fail
> here — Windows' File/Registry Virtualization redirects the save to a
> per-user shadow copy with no error if the elevation didn't actually take,
> so the edit looks successful but the real file is untouched):
> ```powershell
> Add-Content -Path C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts -Value "127.0.0.1 keycloak.crownlabs.local"
> ```
> Verify it actually landed (`Get-Content C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts
> | Select-String crownlabs`), then `ipconfig /flushdns` and `ping
> keycloak.crownlabs.local` (expect a reply from `127.0.0.1`) before retrying
> the browser.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Please note that the modifications in the local `/etc/hosts` file are effective when you connect to the cluster from the same host.
If you have a second machine connecting to the K3s cluster, you need to modify the `/etc/hosts` file of the second machine accordingly (replacing the `127.0.0.1` string with the IP address of the K3s hosts).

```

## 5. On WSL2: bridge the Gateway

> Same underlying limitation already documented for Keycloak's old NodePort (tested and

Reviewer: I'm not sure I got the point.
Can you write in simpler language?
